@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c File     : gtk-selectors.texi
@c License  : GNU General Public License (GPL)
@c Language : English
@c Author   : Dieter Kaiser
@c Date     : 23.06.2012
@c Revision : 23.06.2012
@c 
@c Copyright (C) 2012 by Dieter Kaiser
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Selecting Colors::
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Selecting Colors
@section Selecting Colors

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Representing Colors
@subsection Representing Colors

Colors are represented as a structure of the type @code{GdkRGBA}, which is
defined in the library GDK.  The stucture has the properties @code{red},
@code{green}, @code{blue}, and @code{alpha} to represent rgba colors.  It is
based on cairo's way to deal with colors and mirrors its behavior.  All values
are in the range from @code{0.0d0} to @code{1.0d0} inclusive.  So the color
@code{(0.0d0, 0.0d0, 0.0d0, 0.0d0)} represents transparent black and
@code{(1.0d0, 1.0d0, 1.0d0, 1.0d0)} is opaque white.  Other values will be
clamped to this range when drawing.

To create a representation of the color red use
@code{(make-gdk-rgba :red 1.0d0)}.  Alternatively, the function
@code{gdk-rgba-parse} parses a textual representation of a color, filling in the
red, green, blue and alpha fields of the @code{GdkRGBA} structure.  The string
can be either one of:

@itemize
@item A standard name (Taken from the X11 rgb.txt file).
@item A hex value in the form 'rgb' 'rrggbb' 'rrrgggbbb' or 'rrrrggggbbbb'
@item A RGB color in the form 'rgb(r,g,b)' (In this case the color will have
      full opacity)
@item A RGBA color in the form 'rgba(r,g,b,a)'
@end itemize

Where 'r', 'g', 'b' and 'a' are respectively the red, green, blue and alpha
color values. In the last two cases, r g and b are either integers in the
range 0 to 255 or precentage values in the range 0% to 100%, and a is a
floating point value in the range 0 to 1.

Conversely, the function @code{gdk-rgba-to-string} returns a textual
specification of the rgba color in the form rgb (r, g, b) or
rgba (r, g, b, a), where 'r', 'g', 'b' and 'a' represent the red, green,
blue and alpha values respectively.  r, g, and b are represented as integers
in the range 0 to 255, and a is represented as floating point value in the
range 0 to 1.

These string forms are string forms those supported by the CSS3 colors
module, and can be parsed by gdk_rgba_parse().
 
Note that this string representation may loose some precision, since r, g
and b are represented as 8-bit integers. If this is a concern, you should
use a different representation.

A simple example is the representation of the color red, which can be created
with @code{(gdk-rgba-parse "Red"} from a string and converted back to a textual
with (gdk-rgba-to-string (gdk-rgba-parse "Red")).  The result of the last
function is @code{"rgba(255,0,0,0)"}.

Note, that GTK+ knows a second and older representation of colors as a structure
of type @code{GdkColor}.  The widgets for choosing a color know both
representations. 

